2025 5th International Conference on Advanced Research in Computing (ICARC) | 979-8-3315-3098-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICARC64760.2025.10962827

Enhancing Automated Grading with Capabilities of
LLMs: Using Prompt Engineering and RAG
Techniques
Thisuri Abeywardana
School of Computing
University of Colombo
Colombo, Sri Lanka
thisuriabeywardana@gmail.com
Sudam Rohanadheera
School of Computing
University of Colombo
Colombo, Sri Lanka
slr@ucsc.cmb.ac.lk

Nethmini Nandadewa
School of Computing
University of Colombo
Colombo, Sri Lanka
nethmininandadewa@gmail.com

Vimansa Wickramasinghe
School of Computing
University of Colombo
Colombo, Sri Lanka
vwickramasinghe1998@gmail.com

Thilini Nadungodage
School of Computing
University of Colombo
Colombo, Sri Lanka
hnd@ucsc.cmb.ac.lk

Priyantha Hewagamage
School of Computing
University of Colombo
Colombo, Sri Lanka
kph@ucsc.cmb.ac.lk

Abstract—This research explores the potential of Large Language Models (LLMs) to automate the grading process in
education by harnessing LLMs’ sophisticated understanding of
language and instructions following nature. We explore the
effectiveness of providing subject knowledge and utilizing prompt
engineering techniques to grade the students’ written answers
for different question types and various theoretical subjects. A
grading rubric was employed to ensure consistency and fairness
in the assessment process. The study results highlighted the
importance of providing external knowledge within the prompt
to enhance the automated student answer grading utilizing
LLMs. Including grading rubrics, model answers, and course
content significantly enhanced the accuracy of scores assigned
by the LLM, reducing deviations from human evaluator scores.
Providing course content or model answers also helped define the
expected answer scope and guide the LLM in determining other
possible correct answers. Using prompt engineering techniques
within the prompt failed to outperform the basic prompt,
suggesting the need for further exploration and refinement in
prompt design strategies.
Keywords—LLM, RAG, AES, Grading, Prompt engineering

I. I NTRODUCTION
Starting from AES systems developed employing rule-based
algorithms [1], utilizing traditional machine learning with
neural networks, the automated grading concept evolved to
employ transformer models [2]. This evolvement opened up
the path for LLMs to be utilized as the next step in this research area replacing traditional assessment of student answers
by human evaluators. The traditional assessment process is a
tedious task which tends to have human errors and subjective
since the grading decisions of human evaluators depend on
experience, knowledge, and their thinking patterns.
LLMs like OpenAI GPT excel in natural language processing, showcasing advanced reasoning and response generation,
making them promising for AES applications. Researchers
have already utilized LLMs for AES of language tests such as

IELTS and TOEFL [3]. However, LLMs generating hallucinations leads to inaccurate responses. Revolutionary techniques
have been introduced along with the development of LLMs to
reduce them such as Rational Augmented Generation (RAG)
[4] to provide external knowledge to LLMs. This improves
reliability and is also a way to provide the latest information
to LLMs without training.
This research combined RAG and prompt engineering techniques with the capabilities of LLMs, to grade student answers
written for different question types from several theoretical
IT subjects providing relevant course content to answer the
questions.
Therefore, the following research questions will be addressed in this research.
How to effectively use the capabilities of OpenAI GPT
Models for automated grading
RQ1: How to improve automated grading through Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) and using prompt
engineering techniques?
• RQ2: How well do different OpenAI GPT Models perform in automated grading across various subjects and
question types?
•

The prompt is the method of communication with the LLMs.
Therefore, we created a prompt with the necessary instructions
and resources for grading. The questions and students’ answers
are the resources in the initial basic prompt, and gradually,
it was modified by adding a grading rubric, model answer,
and course content. Student answers for different question
types and subjects were graded using these basic prompts. To
evaluate the effectiveness of prompt engineering techniques,
they were gradually incorporated into the basic prompt with
course content and marked student answers for only a selected
subject. The following is the contribution of research.

979-8-3315-3098-3/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitas Indonesia. Downloaded on November 06,2025 at 08:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

We analyze the effectiveness of adding course content
into the prompt used for the grading process utilizing the
RAG technique.
• We evaluate the performance of LLMs to mark answers
for different question types and subjects.
• We study the effectiveness of utilizing prompt engineering techniques within the automated grading process.

•

II. R EALTED W ORK
A. Automated Essay Scoring
The evolution of Automated Essay Scoring (AES) systems
initiated employing rule-based algorithms such as Project
Essay Grader (PEG) [1], which assessed essays based on
grammar and composition, and progressed to utilize semantic
analysis with systems like the Intelligent Essay Assessor (IEA)
[5] employing Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). Bayesian
models [6] and Ridge regression [7] were introduced, focusing
on text classification and similarity measures. Subsequent
advancements included the integration of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) techniques, supervised and unsupervised
learning methods [8], and neural networks such as Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) and Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) [9].
B. Applications in AES
Transformers like BERT [2] have enhanced AES by capturing deep semantic information. Mizumoto and Eguchi [3]
conducted a study on the potential use of prompt-based GPT
for AES. The study found that incorporating linguistic features
enhanced benchmark-level prediction significantly, suggesting
that combining GPT and research-based linguistic features
may yield optimal professional ratings. A study by Kevin
et al. [10] has focused on assessing GPT 3.5 and GPT 4
on rating short essays written in a Second Language. They
have used the CEFR rubric and a human-rated dataset of
short essay responses. Nevertheless, the Quadratic Weighted
Kappa (QWK) scores fell below the values produced by the
baseline model trained using XGBoost or human annotators.
They concluded GPT-4 needed just one calibration example
per rating category for near-optimal performance, while other
prompt engineering techniques were less effective. Also, they
mentioned that there is more space for future research to
explore other prompt engineering strategies to improve GPT
performance. A recent study [11] assessed GPT-4 and finetuned GPT-3.5 as AES tools. They have employed prompt
engineering and further fine-tuning methods, exploring various
grading approaches. In their research, prompt engineering
involved refining instructions with GPT-4. The Few-shot approaches have incorporated rubrics and sample essays. As of
the findings, supervised models performed best, with detailed
information enhancing GPT-4’s performance.
C. Prompt Engineering Techniques
Various prompt engineering techniques were identified in
several studies to enhance the interaction with LLMs. A study
[12] has introduced a catalog of prompt patterns and combined

them to enhance LLM performance. They have categorized
pattern types such as input semantics, Output customization, Error identification, Prompt improvement, Interaction,
and Context control, along with example prompts and their
limitations.
Fine Tuning and prompt engineering can be used to customize LLMs. A research [13] has analyzed three prompt
engineering techniques (basic prompting, in-context learning,
and task-specific prompting) for code generation, comment
generation, and code translation utilizing fine-tuned LLMs and
GPT-4. Another research [14] has been done to enhance the
reasoning ability of LLMs by employing a method inspired
by fine-tuning and few-shot learning combined with chainof-thought. In conclusion, the study’s main finding is that
chain-of-thought prompting outperforms standard prompting
in arithmetic, commonsense, and symbolic reasoning tasks
instead of fine-tuning models.
D. Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)
RAG is a technique that retrieves up-to-date information
from a vast database and enhances the LLM instructions,
prompting the LLMs to generate a response. The work of Oded
Ovadia [15] compares fine-tuning and RAG as knowledge injection techniques. They have employed three LLMs: Llama27B, Mistral-7B, and Orca2-7B along with base models. The
results show that RAG outperforms both base models and
finetuning.
In-Context Retrieval-Augmented Language Modeling
(RALM)is proposed in [4]. They have employed frozen
off-the-shelf Language models with the RAG approach
finding that reranking retrieved knowledge improves response
accuracy. Research [16] utilized GPT-3.5-turbo for seven
question-answering experiments with RAG, comparing ARMRAG and Obfuscated ARM-RAG. ARM-RAG used standard
examples, while Obfuscated ARM-RAG replaced nouns with
nonsensical words and proper names with rare ones. The
study concluded that RAG improves question answering by
enhancing the quality of retrieved examples, as demonstrated
by the superior performance of Obfuscated ARM-RAG.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Data set
This research focuses on evaluating student answers written
for specific subjects or modules. Therefore, we utilize a private
dataset comprising student answers for structured questions
from the University of Colombo School of Computing’s
Bachelor of Information Technology (External) program for
the Academic Years 2021 and 2022. The questions were
categorized by the expected answer type: open-ended and short
answer types. The student answers were from the 3rd Year
Examination, Semester 5, for IT 5105 Professional Issues in
IT(PIIT) and IT 5306 Principles of Information Security(IS).
The dataset consisted of the questions, student answers, model
answers and the marks given by the university lecturers.
Course content for each module was also incorporated to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitas Indonesia. Downloaded on November 06,2025 at 08:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

create ”chunks” used in the automated student answer assessment process. We fixed formatting issues and inconsistencies and provided necessary document translations during the
data cleaning phase. We thoroughly reviewed each student’s
response and the teacher’s marking to ensure accuracy. We
selected six questions from the Professional Issues in IT and
four from the Information Security subject along with the
model answers. We selected 100 answers for each question
based on the clarity of handwriting and a total of 1000 student
responses were scanned. Due to the lack of rubrics in the
dataset, a basic rubric structure was developed by following
lecturers’ marking practices. For the reproducibility of the
results, we are in the process of publishing the dataset without
violating the privacy of the respective owners. A sample from
the dataset is provided in (Table I).
TABLE I: A SAMPLE FROM THE DATASET
Question
Student
Answer
Marks
Model
answer

Rubric

What is the difference between a centralized company and a
decentralized company?
In centralised company authority and power keep with the top
management. In decentralised company authority and power
shared with lower levels
4 marks (provided by lecturer)
In a centralized company, as much power as possible is kept
at the top of the company, with delegation only when essential
In a decentralized company, as much power and control as
possible is delegated to the lowest level
4 points - Having described both centralized company and
decentralized company correctly, as mentioned in the ”model
answer”
2 points - Having described only one from the centralized
company or decentralized company correctly, as mentioned
in the ”model answer”
0 points - Having described none of the centralized company
and decentralized company correctly, as mentioned in the
”model answer”

In Sub-experiment 01 we assessed the marking capabilities of
GPT-4 in five approaches, including the RAG technique. Five
basic prompts were created incrementally adding components
(Table II) to communicate with the model, including the steps
to follow when grading student answers.
TABLE II: APPROACHES FOLLOWED FOR STUDENT ANSWER
ASSESSMENT
Q+A
Approach 1

Providing the question and the student’s answer to GPT-4,
prompting it to assign a grade based on comprehension within
a specified score range.
Q+A+R
In addition to the question and student answer, grading rubrics
Approach 2
guide GPT-4’s evaluation, aligned with predefined criteria.
Q+A+R+C
providing course content using RAG, aiding GPT-4 in underApproach 3
standing the scope of relevant subject knowledge for more
informed evaluation.
Q+A+R+MA
Adds a model answer to guide GPT-4 to understand the depth
Approach 4
of the expected response and compare the student’s answer
to determine grading accuracy.
Q+A+R+MA+C Combines the model answer and course content for a deeper
Approach 5
and comprehensive grading.

Approach 3 and 5 employed a retrieval-based methodology
to identify the most relevant course content segments. The
utilized course material for exam questions was divided into
smaller parts called “Chunks”. Chunking involves manually
segmenting the course content based on the logical connection
of academic content. Further, the token limit was considered
when deciding the length of a chunk. Chunks were stored in
a vector database to retrieve only the relevant course content
chunk for the question considering the vector similarity. The
approach we used to store these chunks in the vector database
is illustrated in Fig. 1.

B. Methods
This section will present the methods we followed in this
study’s experiments. The methods can be divided into two
parts: preliminary experiment and main experiment. Both
experiments generated the responses using a 0 temperature
value as a parameter. In the preliminary experiment, we
evaluated and compared the capabilities of different Open
AI GPT models to assign grades for the student’s answers.
We selected the best-performing model for automated student
answer grading by comparing GPT-4, GPT 3.5-turbo, and
GPT 3.5-turbo- instruct models. Based on the outcome of the
preliminary experiment, the GPT-4 model was identified as the
highest-performing model within the considered context.
The main experiment consists of 3 sub-experiments:
Sub-experiment 01 - employing 5 approaches including
RAG and grading different question types.
• Sub-experiment 02 - grading student answers for different
subjects.
• Sub-experiment 03 - grading student answers by enhancing the prompt.

•

Fig. 1. Process of creating the Vector Database

The text-embedding-ada-002 model by Open AI was utilized
to determine the embeddings equivalent to every text chunk.
As a result, we obtained a set of k chunks that demonstrated
high relevancy to the question. As demonstrated by earlier
research [10] on AES tasks, there was no consistent improvement in results, obtained by raising the value of ‘k’ instead
a pattern of diminishing marginal returns was demonstrated.
Proceeding with [10] findings [11], further discussed and
presented k=3 as a reasonable k value. After determining the k
value and establishing the vector database, the method utilized
for grading student answers using GPT-4 and RAG approach,
is shown in Fig. 2.
The second sub-experiment was designed to explore the
performance of GPT -4 in grading student answers across
different subjects and further to analyze the stability of the
outcome of Sub-experiment 01. Accordingly, the same five

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitas Indonesia. Downloaded on November 06,2025 at 08:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III: COMPARISON OF QWK VALUES FOR ASSESSMENT OF
STUDENT ANSWERS FOR PIIT WITH BASICS PROMPTS
Approach
Approach 5
Approach 4
Approach 3
Approach 2
Approach 1

Q1
0.983
0.997
0.986
-0.558
-0.456

Q2
0.928
0.937
0.928
0.514
0.689

Q3
0.943
0.969
0.933
0.194
0.347

Q4
0.843
0.899
0.846
0.610
0.342

Q5
0.868
0.841
0.809
0.311
0.142

Q6
0.538
0.505
0.487
0.407
0.253

Avg.
0.850
0.858
0.832
0.246
0.220

Fig. 2. Fundamental approach of marking with course content and model
answer

value achieved was 0.610, and the performance remained
unsteady.
basic prompts were utilized in sub-experiment 02 with a
different subject module. Sub-experiment 03 was conducted
to assess the potential of using prompt engineering techniques
to enhance the performance of GPT-4 in the AES context.
We employed several prompt engineering techniques in this
configuration through different prompt versions. Three versions of prompts were designed to assess the effectiveness of
using different prompt engineering techniques. The prompts
are structured in an incremental pattern, with each subsequent
prompt building upon the preceding one, by adding an extra
prompt engineering technique. The total monetary cost is
determined by the token count and openAI model pricing that
we used in the study. During the presented study, 87.05$ was
invested in the OpenAI GPT-4 model and text-embedding-ada002. However, at the time the research was conducted OpenAI
offered free 5$ per account, which we utilized for the GPT 3.5
Turbo and GPT 3.5 Turbo Instruct models in the preliminary
experiment.
IV. R ESULTS AND E VALUATION
The following section analyzes the main experiment’s outcomes and results from each sub-experiment.
A. Sub-experiment 01 - employing 5 approaches including
RAG and grading different question types
The experiment was conducted with a dataset comprising
600 data points, derived from 100 students’ answers per
question. The main objective was to investigate the potential
of utilizing the RAG model for automated grading of students’
answers while exploring the nature of the performance of the
GPT-4 model in grading different question types. The outcome
of this sub-experiment is presented in Table III. (Q1, Q2, Q3
are open ended questions and Q4, Q5, Q6 are questions with
short answers)
The first approach showed very low results, with fluctuating
levels of agreement that did not match the QWK levels
achieved by previous GPT-based AES research. [3].
In the second approach, we incorporated a grading rubric
additionally to provide clear guidance on the marks distribution for each question defining the possible instances of a
student’s answer. Although this approach improved grading of
open-ended questions, performance for marking short answers
declined. Despite providing grading rubrics, the highest QWK

According to the results, Q1 has received negative QWK values for approaches 1 and 2 because of the high disagreement
between the model-generated and human-assigned scores. The
model has concluded a wrong answer as the correct answer
for the question due to hallucinations and gives a score to the
student’s answer by evaluating the student’s answer based on
that.
As a further refinement, approach 3 was adopted. The course
content provides the knowledge base that should be considered during students’ answers grading. The GPT models can
understand the content and identify all the possible answers
to the given questions. This approach produced promising
outcomes, achieving more than 0.8 QWK values for five of
the six questions utilized in the experiment. Moreover, the
model demonstrated stable QWK levels without any significant
fluctuations for most of the questions.
However, the performance for one question remained below
0.5, indicating an area that needs further optimization. Hence,
as the next component, we incorporated the model answers
prepared based on the course content for each question instead
of providing the course content, defining the scope of the expected answer for each question. It can further guide the large
language model, indicating the knowledge margins that should
be considered when grading the students’ answers. In this
method, the GPT model compared the student’s answers with
the model answer while adhering to the grading rubric. We
could observe improved performance, demonstrating elevated
QWK value exceeding 0.5 for the open-ended question that
needed further refinement. Furthermore, this method exceeded
the 0.8 QWK value for most of the questions.
Proceeding further, to provide more comprehensive inputs
related to the question, approach 5 was adopted. With the
approach 5, the GPT model performed the marking process,
adhering to the grading rubric and comparing the students’
answers against both the model answer and the course content.
The knowledge margins and the knowledge base are provided
together so that the model can consider the expected answer
and draw other possible answers from the course content.
However, the results revealed a decline in agreement level
(QWK) compared to the approach in which we provided only
the model answer. Nevertheless, this technique sustained the
performance levels for most questions above 0.8 and maintained consistent performance stability across the questions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitas Indonesia. Downloaded on November 06,2025 at 08:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Analyzing the average QWK values for each approach for
the six questions revealed significant findings. Conforming
to the guidelines presented by Landis and Koch [17], it can
be observed that providing only the question and students’
answers demonstrates a fair level of agreement between the
score generated by the model and those assigned by the human
evaluator. Though incorporating grading rubrics enhanced the
QWK value, it remained at a fair level of agreement.
Conversely, integrating the model answer in the prompt or
providing course content as external knowledge significantly
elevated the QWK level, peaking at 0.8 and above, reaching
the almost perfect level of agreement.
1) The Comparison Between the QWK values: open-ended
questions vs. Short answers questions : In our comparative
analysis shown in Table IV of average QWK values for openended questions and short answer questions, we observed that
Approach 3, Approach 4, and Approach 5 were able to achieve
QWK values of 0.95 and above for short answers and QWK
values over 0.70 for open-ended questions.
TABLE IV: QWK COMPARISON OF OPEN ENDED QUESTIONS VS.
QUESTIONS WITH SHORT ANSWERS
Approach
Approach 5
Approach 4
Approach 3
Approach 2
Approach 1

Short Answers
0.95
0.95
0.97
0.05
0.19

Open
0.75
0.71
0.75
0.44
0.25

B. Sub-experiment 02 - grading student answers for different
subjects.
This sub-experiment used 400 data points considering 100
students’ answers per question. When analysing the performance outcomes (Table V), we observed that the QWK levels
for the first two approaches were low and drastically fluctuated
across the questions. Approach 2 also did not significantly
improve performance. As we proceeded with the other three
approaches, which showed promising results in the experiment
with PIIT, the performance of the GPT 4 model was improved
for the Information Security subject as well. Not only did
these approaches reach above 0.8 in the QWK level, but the
performance level was stabilized within the same range for
each question.
TABLE V: COMPARISON OF QWK VALUES FOR ASSESSMENT OF
STUDENT ANSWERS FOR INFORMATION SECURITY WITH BASICS
PROMPTS
All considered questions are open-ended questions.
Approach
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Avg.
Approach 5
0.878
0.745
0.888
0.821
0.833
Approach 4
0.813
0.783
0.872
0.831
0.825
Approach 3
0.891
0.893
0.921
0.941
0.912
Approach 2
0.281
0.494
0.881
0.149
0.451
Approach 1
0.105
0.504
0.639
0.336
0.396

We discuss the average QWK values, showing a pattern similar to Sub-experiment 01 (Fig. 3). Providing model answers

or course content improved GPT-4’s performance in grading
student answers in the Information Security domain, achieving
QWK values above 0.8, indicating near-perfect agreement with
human evaluators’ scores.

Fig. 3. Comparison Between the Average QWK values for Assessment of
Student Answers for PIIT vs. IS

C. Sub-experiment 03 - Prompt Enhancing Experiment
This experiment explored enhancing GPT’s performance in
assessing student answers by integrating prompt engineering.
Table VI shows results for selected questions from Professional Issues in IT papers.
TABLE VI: QWK COMPARISON FOR PIIT WITH DIFFERENT
PROMPT VERSIONS FOR Q+A+R+C APPROACH
Prompt Version
Basic Prompt
Version 1
Version 2
Version 3

Q1
0.986
0.986
0.987
0.967

Q2
0.928
0.926
0.926
0.922

Q3
0.933
0.909
0.905
0.885

Q4
0.846
0.695
0.708
0.828

Q5
0.809
0.567
0.497
0.686

Q6
0.487
0.479
0.5
0.491

To enhance the basic prompt, we first applied the chainof-thought prompting technique in prompt version one.The
objective was to guide the GPT models through the grading
process by allowing the model to think step by step. This
technique achieved a QWK over 0.9 for short answers but
remained between 0.5 and 0.7 for open-ended questions.
The persona pattern was combined with the Chain of
thought technique to advance to the second prompt version.
The persona pattern introduced the persona of an examiner
possessing expertise in the PIIT Subject, aimed at providing
the model with an understanding of the scope and responsibilities associated with the assigned role. This technique
maintained the QWK level for questions with short answers
consistent with the previous prompt version by maintaining a
QWK level exceeding 0.9. Additionally, it depicted a marginal
enhancement of open-ended questions grading performance
for two questions, although one demonstrated a decline in
performance.
Prompt version 3 was developed by integrating a ‘task
breakdown’ into prompt version 2 comprising CoT and persona pattern. The experiment showed almost perfect QWK
values [17] for questions with short answers and substantial
agreement exceeding 0.7 as the QWK level only for one of
three open-ended questions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitas Indonesia. Downloaded on November 06,2025 at 08:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Prompt engineering techniques like chain-of-thought and
task breakdown enhance the model’s reasoning ability. It
helped the model think clearly and reduced hallucinations and
incorrect responses generations. It supported deriving the reason behind the assigned grade. Prompt versions using various
above prompt engineering techniques showed promising performance in automated student answer grading. However, the
results showed that combining prompt engineering techniques
did not surpass the basic prompt, maintaining performance for
short answers but slightly declining for open-ended questions.
V. L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
The research was mainly focused on grading open-ended
questions and short answer questions in theoretical subjects
in the Information Technology domain. The study can be expanded to grade student answers written for coding questions,
essay answer questions, and diagram-related questions.
Furthermore, since existing public datasets that are widely
used in the AES research domain lack course content and
rubrics, it limits this approach to be performed with publicly
available datasets hence cannot be comparatively analyzed
against previous work. Assessing the students’ answers with
alternative LLMs could analyze their capabilities for student
answer grading compared to the OpenAI GPT-4 model that
was utilized in this research.
Moreover, the dataset lacked properly generated rubrics
from the university. Thus, by examining the marking practices
of lecturers, a basic grading rubric structure was created. To
find the most understandable way for LLMs to comprehend
grading rubrics, a variety of variations could be examined.
VI. C ONCLUSION
The preliminary analysis of the study shows the capability
and efficacy of employing the GPT 4 model in this context.
The findings of the final experiments propose that providing
only the question and answer is insufficient for grading student answers. Yet, the GPT-4 model shows promising results
when integrated with course content via the RAG approach
or lecturer-provided model answers. It limits LLMs’ broad
knowledge they are trained on, by defining the expected answer’s scope and restricting applicable knowledge for deriving
alternatives answers.
According to this study, it can be concluded that all used
prompt engineering techniques could improve the reasoning
capabilities of GPT-4. Even though the utilized techniques
enhanced the performance of the grading process, these engineered prompts were not able to surpass the performance of
five basic prompts.
The outcomes confirms that GPT-4 can be effectively used
for automated grading of student answers in IT theoretical
exams or assignments.Since providing course content has
proven effective in enhancing accuracy, the academic staff can
grade students’ answers even without deriving model answers
for every question. Further, it enforces more transparency
as the utilized LLM provides logical reasoning of how the

grading was carried out that can be provided to students as a
feedback.
R EFERENCES
[1] H. B. Ajay et al., “Analysis of essays by computer (aec-ii). final report.,”
1973.
[2] C. Sung, T. I. Dhamecha, and N. Mukhi, “Improving short answer
grading using transformer-based pre-training,” in Artificial Intelligence
in Education: 20th International Conference, AIED 2019, Chicago, IL,
USA, June 25-29, 2019, Proceedings, Part I 20, pp. 469–481, Springer,
2019.
[3] A. Mizumoto and M. Eguchi, “Exploring the potential of using an ai
language model for automated essay scoring,” Research Methods in
Applied Linguistics, vol. 2, no. 2, p. 100050, 2023.
[4] O. Ram, Y. Levine, I. Dalmedigos, D. Muhlgay, A. Shashua, K. LeytonBrown, and Y. Shoham, “In-context retrieval-augmented language models,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
vol. 11, pp. 1316–1331, 2023.
[5] P. W. Foltz, D. Laham, and T. K. Landauer, “The intelligent essay
assessor: Applications to educational technology,” Interactive Multimedia Electronic Journal of Computer-Enhanced Learning, vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 939–944, 1999.
[6] L. M. Rudner and T. Liang, “Automated essay scoring using bayes’
theorem,” The Journal of Technology, Learning and Assessment, vol. 1,
no. 2, 2002.
[7] M. A. Sultan, C. Salazar, and T. Sumner, “Fast and easy short answer
grading with high accuracy,” in Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 1070–1075, 2016.
[8] N. Süzen, A. N. Gorban, J. Levesley, and E. M. Mirkes, “Automatic
short answer grading and feedback using text mining methods,” Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 169, pp. 726–743, 2020.
[9] K. Taghipour and H. T. Ng, “A neural approach to automated essay
scoring,” in Proceedings of the 2016 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing, pp. 1882–1891, 2016.
[10] K. P. Yancey, G. Laflair, A. Verardi, and J. Burstein, “Rating short l2
essays on the cefr scale with gpt-4,” in Proceedings of the 18th Workshop
on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA
2023), pp. 576–584, 2023.
[11] C. Xiao, W. Ma, S. X. Xu, K. Zhang, Y. Wang, and Q. Fu, “From
automation to augmentation: Large language models elevating essay
scoring landscape,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06431, 2024.
[12] J. White, Q. Fu, S. Hays, M. Sandborn, C. Olea, H. Gilbert, A. Elnashar, J. Spencer-Smith, and D. C. Schmidt, “A prompt pattern
catalog to enhance prompt engineering with chatgpt,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.11382, 2023.
[13] J. Shin, C. Tang, T. Mohati, M. Nayebi, S. Wang, and H. Hemmati, “Prompt engineering or fine tuning: An empirical assessment of
large language models in automated software engineering tasks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.10508, 2023.
[14] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le,
D. Zhou, et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 35, pp. 24824–24837, 2022.
[15] O. Ovadia, M. Brief, M. Mishaeli, and O. Elisha, “Fine-tuning or
retrieval? comparing knowledge injection in llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.05934, 2023.
[16] E. Melz, “Enhancing llm intelligence with arm-rag: Auxiliary rationale memory for retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.04177, 2023.
[17] J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, “The measurement of observer agreement
for categorical data,” biometrics, pp. 159–174, 1977.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitas Indonesia. Downloaded on November 06,2025 at 08:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

